# ... the live interview?

The recent Trump interview broadcast on HBO has been an unqualified success for the network. Drawing in over 10 million views on YouTube in only a few days, it has been extensively covered by news networks and decsribed as "mind-numbing", "deluded", and "a train-wreck". The interview, Jonathan Swan, a journalist of ten years, has also been widely praised. The Evening Standard has offered a featurette branding him a "hero". CNN has devoted a video interview to analysing "the secret to exposing lies".

Swan's methodology is not that deep. CNN offers a nice summary, beneath the heavy padding in its article - Swan asked basic follow-up questions. This is not exactly a big secret revolutiionising the world of journlism, in fact it's almost the only shared trait of good reporters. Yet there is much commendable about Swan's performance. Guiding Donald Trump to talk about confront specific issues is a nigh-on impossible task, yet Swan achieved it better than most. Using a self-proclaimed framework of 'Who? What? How? No.', Swan's systematic response to every Trump response probed and coaxed about some measure of the President's justification to every wild claim he has shouted about over the past few weeks. From justification comes understanding, critique, and accountability. Having now understood Trump's point of view, seasoned experts invited onto the mainstream news channels can summarise Trump's argument and explain its flaws, rolling back the facade of credibility. Ultimately, Swan demonstrated a balance between 